---
author: eloiserobbins
comments: true
date: 2015-11-28 14:49:40+00:00
layout: blog
link: https://eloiserobbins.wordpress.com/2015/11/28/j-holed/
slug: j-holed
title: J-Holed
wordpress_id: 48
tags:
- Grand Canyon
- Rafting
- South West
tagimg: 'https://eloiserobbins.files.wordpress.com/2015/12/image21.jpeg'
---

The hole reaches up with an icy fist and grabs me. I resist, holding onto the raft for one second, for two seconds, but then it sucks me down so hard I'm sure the raft has flipped. As I'm dragged down towards the bottom of the river, I have no idea if the hole will release its grip on me, or if I'll be recirculated forever.


The hole reaches up with an icy fist and grabs me. I resist, holding onto the raft for one second, for two seconds, but then it sucks me down so hard I'm sure the raft has flipped. As I'm dragged down towards the bottom of the river, I have no idea if the hole will release its grip on me, or if I'll be recirculated forever.

The first rapid we run that day is Granite, an 8. Granite is a huge adrenaline rush- the current shoots you towards the rock wall, but holds you just out of reach, rocketing you along close enough to almost touch. As we come out of the tail waves, I feel something wet on the inside of my leg.
Uh oh. That is not something that's supposed to happen when you're wearing a dry suit. I look down to see two jagged tears on the inside of my knees. Ok. We're stopping to scout Hermit, the next rapid of the day. I can patch it then. How typical that my drysuit would fail on the day of the trip with the biggest water. More than ever, I do not want to swim.
We stop above Hermit, and Liz creates duct tape patches for me, winding tape around my legs until it looks like I'm wearing knee pads. It'll keep off the splashes, but I'll be in trouble if I end up in the water.
Hermit is one of my favourite large rapids of the trip. A giant wave train, it is problematic at high water, but just loads of fun at our water level. I'm finally starting to be more comfortable with the massive water of the Colorado.
Crystal is next. Anyone who has read the Emerald Mile will have a picture in their head of the giant boat eating hole, capable of ripping apart a 40 foot raft. Then there is a rock garden, and tailwaves that hide nasty hydraulics. I'm anxious.
There's no reason to be. Crystal is easier than many of the 5s and 6s we're already run. The monster hole slumbers, just big enough for us to notice how nasty it looks, but small enough to be easy to avoid. There's a sharp hole in the tailwaves that we hit, and it rocks our boat, but we bust through without a problem.
We are jubilant. We cruise down the river, excited for how well the big rapids have gone. Now, we're on to a series of smaller rapids known as the gems- all named things like Emerald and Agate. They're like the Roaring Twenties, but many of them hide more sinister hazards.
It's Ruby that gets us. A fun wave train along a left hand turn has a flat hole hidden at the bottom. Jerami has turned, pulling away from the wall. We don't see the hole until we're almost in it. I have just enough time to ask Kevin if that's a hole before we're sideways.
It's instantaneous. The raft is suddenly stood up on it's side, the floor becoming a wall. I hold on tight to the straps on my seat, and try to make a grab for the line around the boat, a pathetic attempt to high side. My seat is slick, and the it's a matter of seconds before the water breaking over the hole washes me off of the raft.
I'm swept under the raft. Everything is dark for a few seconds, the only noise is the water churning in my ears. I feel the hole grab at my feet and I kick out, hoping to break its grip. Then there is light- rushing towards my face as my life jacket shoots me towards air. I surface in the tail waves. Traverse throws me a rope and pulls me in towards a raft.
Only when I have a hand on the raft do I remember to ask about the other people on the boat. I turn back, suddenly panicked all over again, to ask if Jerami's been spat out or if he's still stuck in the hole. Out of the corner of my eye, I see him. He's on top of our raft, upright, poker faced, as if nothing has happened. He'd high sided the boat for long enough that the current had released him. Apart from my swim, the only casualties were a spare oar and one of our river guide books.
We have one more rapid to run before camp. Serpentine is described as a bigger version of Ruby, but there's no time to be nervous. We're swept along on the current, through before I can even blink. Then we're at Bass Camp. Fluted shist frames our kitchen and it's warm from the day's sun. I'm soaked from the waist down, and so cold. I change quickly, thankful for tomorrow's layover day.
